# Logic Problems and Brain Teasers

 1. You have two lengths of rope. If you set fire to the end of either of them, the rope will burn in exactly one hour. They are not the same length or width as each other. They also are not of uniform width (they might, for example, be wider in the middle than at the end), thus burning half of the rope is not necessarily going to take 30 minutes. By burning the ropes, how do you measure exactly 15 minutes worth of time?

 2. There is an airplane with 100 assigned seats. The first passenger to get on has lost his ticket, so he randomly chooses a seat. Every passenger after him takes their assigned seat if it's available, but if it's already taken, then they'll choose a random seat also. What is the probability that the last passenger sits in his/her assigned seat?

 3. A group of people with assorted eye colors live on an island. They are all perfect logicians -- if a conclusion can be logically deduced, they will do it instantly. No one knows the color of their eyes. Every night at midnight, a ferry stops at the island. Any islanders who have figured out the color of their own eyes then leave the island, and the rest stay. Everyone can see everyone else at all times and keeps a count of the number of people they see with each eye color (excluding themselves), but they cannot otherwise communicate. Everyone on the island knows all the rules in this paragraph. On this island there are 100 blue-eyed people, 100 brown-eyed people, and the Guru (she happens to have green eyes). So any given blue-eyed person can see 100 people with brown eyes and 99 people with blue eyes (and one with green), but that does not tell him his own eye color; as far as he knows the totals could be 101 brown and 99 blue. Or 100 brown, 99 blue, and he could have red eyes.  The Guru is allowed to speak once (let's say at noon), on one day in all their endless years on the island. Standing before the islanders, she says the following:  **"I can see someone who has blue eyes."**  Who leaves the island, and on what night?  There are no mirrors or reflecting surfaces, nothing dumb. It is not a trick question, and the answer is logical. It doesn't depend on tricky wording or anyone lying or guessing, and it doesn't involve people doing something silly like creating a sign language or doing genetics. The Guru is not making eye contact with anyone in particular; she's simply saying "I count at least one blue-eyed person on this island who isn't me."  And lastly, the answer is not "no one leaves."

 4. A king is going to throw a party tomorrow at which he will serve 1000 bottles of wine to his guests. A guard informs him that one of the bottles has been poisoned, but he doesn't know which. A single drop of poisoned wine will kill a man, but it takes the whole night to work. The king has 1000 condemned prisoners to test the wine on. Obviously, he could give a drop of wine to each prisoner from each bottle and then not serve the wine that was given to the prisoner who dies. However, the king is cruel and wants to minimize the number of prisoners who get to enjoy wine. He does not care how many prisoners die.

 5. There are 4 men each wearing either a black or a white hat. They are standing in rising water, cannot move and can only look forward. Between A and B is a brick wall which they cannot see through. They know that between them are 4 hats of which 2 are black and 2 are white, but they do not know which color they are wearing. In order to stop the level of the water rising and drowning, one of them must call out correctly which color hat he is wearing. They are not allowed to talk to each other and have 10 minutes to fathom it out. Which one of them calls out, and how does he work out which color he is wearing?

 6. There are 23 prisoners. One day, the warden calls them all in and tells them this: "We're going to play a game. There's a room in the prison with two levers on the wall. I won't tell you their initial setting. One by one, I'm going to bring you into the room and you will choose one lever and flip it. Then you return to your cell. I won't bring you in any particular order, and you each will very likely be brought into the room multiple times. Some more than others -- it will be completely random. You might even be brought in several times in a row -- who knows? "When one of you can tell me that you've all been to the room, and you're right, you will all be released. If you're wrong, you'll all be fed to the moat monster. "You have half an hour to decide on a strategy. After that, you all go back to your cells and you won't be able to talk to each other again.

 7. We have 100 prisoners. They are told the night before they are to be taken into a room 1 by 1. Inside the room are 100 boxes in a long row, each box has a push switch, which reveals a name inside. Once released the name is hidden again. Each prisoner will be allowed to open 50 boxes. Only if all 100 prisoners reveal their own name will they be set free. What is the best strategy?

 8. Three gods A, B, and C are called, in no particular order, True, False, and Random. True always speaks truly, False always speaks falsely, but whether Random speaks truly or falsely is a completely random matter. Your task is to determine the identities of A, B, and C by asking three "Yes-no question"; each question must be put to exactly one god. The gods understand English, but will answer all questions in their own language, in which the words for _yes_ and _no_ are _da_ and _ja_, in some order. You do not know which word means which.

 9. A king wishes to marry off his daughter, the princess. He invites all the princes in the land for a competition. Before it begins, he warns all the princes that not winning his daughter's hand will result in execution, but they are free not to participate. All but three princes leave. The remaining three are taken to a room with no reflective surfaces. They are blindfolded. The king tells them that he will mark their forehead with a red dot or a blue dot, and it is their job to determine the color on their head. The first to do this wins. All three are given a red dot, and the blindfolds are removed. The king then says "raise your hand if you see someone with a red dot." The princes are careful not to look any of the either two in the eyes, and they all slowly raise their hands. Almost immediately, One prince says "I am red." How did he know?
 
 10. 5 pirates of different ages have a treasure of 100 gold coins. On their ship, they decide to split the coins using this scheme: The oldest pirate proposes how to share the coins, and ALL pirates (including the oldest) vote for or against it. If 50% or more of the pirates vote for it, then the coins will be shared that way. Otherwise, the pirate proposing the scheme will be thrown overboard, and the process is repeated with the pirates that remain. As pirates tend to be a bloodthirsty bunch, if a pirate would get the same number of coins if he voted for or against a proposal, he will vote against so that the pirate who proposed the plan will be thrown overboard. Assuming that all 5 pirates are intelligent, rational, greedy, and do not wish to die, (and are rather good at math for pirates) what will happen?
